\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gisp.info
@include version.texi
@settitle gisp @value{VERSION}
@documentencoding UTF-8
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for gisp (version @value{VERSION}), a utility for
authenticated file encryption.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Uladzislau Bolbas.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Encryption
@direntry
* gisp: (gisp).                 Authenticated file encryption.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title gisp
@subtitle Fast and secure file encryption (version @value{VERSION})
@author Uladzislau Bolbas
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top gisp

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::            What gisp does.
* Invoking gisp::       Command-line interface and options.
* Pipes and streams::   Using gisp as a filter.
* Passphrase input::    Interactive and non-interactive passphrases.
* Resource limits::     Tuning and bounding cost.
* Security notes::      Guarantees and their limits.
* Container format::    The on-disk layout.
* Reporting bugs::      How to get help.
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@command{gisp} encrypts a file into a single authenticated container and
decrypts it back.  It uses the XChaCha20-Poly1305 authenticated encryption
construction (libsodium's @code{crypto_secretstream}) for the data and
Argon2id for password-based key derivation.

The design favours security defaults: a random salt per file, the whole
container header bound as additional authenticated data to every chunk,
detection of truncation through a final-chunk tag, key material kept in
guarded and locked memory, and atomic, durable output for named files.

@node Invoking gisp
@chapter Invoking gisp

The general form is:

@example
gisp -e @var{file} -o @var{output}     # encrypt
gisp -d @var{vault} -o @var{output}    # decrypt
@end example

A path of @samp{-} selects standard input or standard output
(@pxref{Pipes and streams}).

@table @option
@item -e @var{file}
@itemx --encrypt=@var{file}
Encrypt @var{file} and write a gisp container.

@item -d @var{vault}
@itemx --decrypt=@var{vault}
Decrypt the container @var{vault}.

@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output=@var{file}
Destination path for the result.  Required.

@item -p @var{num}
@itemx --opslimit=@var{num}
Argon2id CPU operations limit used when encrypting.  Higher is stronger
and slower.  Values below libsodium's floor are raised to it.

@item -m @var{bytes}
@itemx --memlimit=@var{bytes}
Argon2id memory limit in bytes used when encrypting.

@item --passphrase-fd=@var{n}
Read the passphrase from file descriptor @var{n} (@pxref{Passphrase input}).

@item --passphrase-file=@var{f}
Read the passphrase from file @var{f}.

@item --max-opslimit=@var{num}
@itemx --max-memlimit=@var{bytes}
@itemx --max-filesize=@var{bytes}
Operator-side ceilings that reject hostile or over-costly containers
(@pxref{Resource limits}).

@item --min-password-length=@var{n}
Required minimum passphrase length.  The default is 12.

@item --allow-weak-password
Permit a minimum below the recommended value.  Required to lower
@option{--min-password-length} under its default.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Display a usage summary and exit.

@item -v
@itemx --version
Display version information and exit.
@end table

@command{gisp} exits 0 on success and 1 on any error.

@node Pipes and streams
@chapter Pipes and streams

When either path is @samp{-}, @command{gisp} acts as a filter:

@example
tar c dir | gisp -e - -o - --passphrase-fd 3 3<key.txt > dir.gisp
gisp -d - -o - --passphrase-fd 3 3<key.txt < dir.gisp | tar x
@end example

Streaming is opt-in and changes two non-cryptographic properties that the
named-file path normally provides:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@strong{Permissions.}  When writing to standard output, @command{gisp}
cannot enforce restrictive permissions on the destination; the redirection
target is created under your umask.  A named output file is always created
with mode 0600.

@item
@strong{Atomicity.}  A named output file is written to a temporary file and
renamed into place only on full success, so a failure never leaves a
partial result.  A stream emits each chunk as soon as it authenticates, so
a downstream consumer may receive earlier (already authenticated) chunks
before a truncated tail is detected.  Treat a non-zero exit status as an
instruction to discard whatever was produced.
@end itemize

The cryptographic guarantees are identical in both modes: every chunk is
authenticated before any byte of it is released, and end-of-stream is
proven by the final-chunk tag.

@node Passphrase input
@chapter Passphrase input

By default @command{gisp} reads the passphrase from the controlling
terminal (@file{/dev/tty}) with echo disabled, and asks for confirmation
when encrypting.  Because it does not read from standard input, you can
pipe data through @command{gisp} and still be prompted.

For non-interactive use---pipelines without a terminal---supply the
passphrase out of band:

@table @option
@item --passphrase-fd=@var{n}
Read one line from file descriptor @var{n}.
@item --passphrase-file=@var{f}
Read one line from file @var{f}.
@end table

Never pass a passphrase as a command-line argument: it would be visible to
other users through the process table.  The fd and file mechanisms avoid
that exposure.  @command{gisp} refuses to use file descriptor 0 for the
passphrase when data is also read from standard input.

@node Resource limits
@chapter Resource limits

@command{gisp} distinguishes two classes of limit.

@strong{Strength knobs} (@option{--opslimit}, @option{--memlimit},
@option{--min-password-length}) protect the owner of the data.  Raising
them is always safe; lowering them weakens your own security, so
@command{gisp} warns on weak key-derivation parameters and gates a reduced
minimum password length behind @option{--allow-weak-password}.

@strong{Resource ceilings} (@option{--max-opslimit},
@option{--max-memlimit}, @option{--max-filesize}) protect the machine that
decrypts an @emph{untrusted} container.  A container's header could ask for
gigabytes of memory or enormous CPU cost; these ceilings bound what
@command{gisp} will honour.  The value carried in a header is always clamped
against the operator's ceiling and can never relax it.

Raising a ceiling lets you create or open more expensive containers, but a
container made with a high cost may not be openable by someone whose ceiling
is lower.  The defaults are chosen to be both safe and portable.

@node Security notes
@chapter Security notes

@itemize @bullet
@item
Authentication covers both the ciphertext and the entire container header,
so tampering with the version, salt, key-derivation parameters, or declared
length is detected.

@item
Each file uses a fresh random salt, so identical passwords produce
unrelated keys.

@item
Passphrases and keys are held in guarded, locked memory and wiped after
use, keeping them out of swap.

@item
Decryption to a named file is atomic; a wrong password or corrupt input
never yields a partial plaintext file.  See @ref{Pipes and streams} for the
streaming caveat.
@end itemize

@node Container format
@chapter Container format

A gisp container begins with a fixed header, followed by a sequence of
authenticated chunks.  All multi-byte integers are little-endian.

@multitable @columnfractions .18 .18 .64
@headitem Offset @tab Size @tab Field
@item 0  @tab 4  @tab Magic @samp{GISP}
@item 4  @tab 2  @tab Format version (1)
@item 6  @tab 8  @tab Argon2id opslimit
@item 14 @tab 8  @tab Argon2id memlimit
@item 22 @tab 16 @tab Argon2id salt
@item 38 @tab 8  @tab Plaintext length, or @code{0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF}
@item 46 @tab 24 @tab secretstream header
@item 70 @tab @dots{} @tab Authenticated chunks
@end multitable

The whole 46-byte metadata block (offsets 0--45) is supplied as additional
authenticated data to every chunk.

When the plaintext length is known (the input was a regular file) it is
stored at offset 38 and a decryptor may cross-check it against the file
size.  When the input was a pipe the length is unknown at the time the
header is written, so the sentinel @code{0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF} is stored
instead and end-of-stream is proven solely by the final-chunk tag.  The two
forms are otherwise identical and interchangeable.

@node Reporting bugs
@chapter Reporting bugs

Report bugs to @email{cmrtumilovic@@gmail.com}.  The project home page is
@url{https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/gisp}.  For general help using
GNU software, see @url{https://www.gnu.org/gethelp/}.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
